[MUSIC]
[SOUND] So this lecture and
really this module is all about debugging.
So debugging is after you write your code
and you try to run it and it doesn't work,
trying to fix the code.
And, not just your code really, I mean,
in general with these IOT devices,
there's code, there's a software part,
but there's also the hardware part.
And, you have to debug them both together,
which adds complexity.
We're just talking right now,
about the software part.
We'll get to the hardware part later and
how to debug that.
But, right now, given the code,
how do you debug that code?
And, you can expect that a lot of
your time will be spent debugging
when you write real pieces of code.
I mean, right now we're working with
the blink example, things like that.
No big deal.
But when you get to complicated pieces of
code, probably, you'll spend more time
debugging than you'll spend writing
the code in the first place.
It's very common in
complicated pieces of code.
So we'll talk a little bit about how
to do debugging and what's required.
Debug and Trace.
So one thing about debugging and
testing in general in debugging
is that you require controllability and
observability to locate the bug.
So what do I mean by that?
Controllability is the ability to control
sources of data that are used
by the system, okay.
This you need in order to apply tests, to
test something, to see if a feature works.
So, when I say source of data used
by the system, what do I mean?
So, the main source of data used by the
system is going to be in the input pins.
If you want to do a test case,
you have to be able to apply
some value to the input pins.
Now, this might be done
through your sensors, right?
So, for instance, say I've got
a switch connected to the input pins.
I can flip that switch off and on and
control the input pins that way,
which is the best, right?
Or, say I've got a light sensor or
something like that and
it's connected to some pins,
I wanna control that.
I can change the lighting in the room.
Right, and control the pins in that way,
indirectly.
So, the input pins are your main interface
and if you want to do a test you say well,
I wonder how my system works if
the switch is flicked on and
it's very bright in the room.
Then you can set that up and
power it on and run it.
That's a test case.
Then you can run other test cases right,
to detect the bugs.
So that's what I mean by controlling
the data sources that the code is using.
Now, the input pins aren't the only thing
if you would like to be able to control.
In addition to that, you would optimally
like to be able to control the internal
data, meaning the storage elements, the
registers and the memory inside the chip.
Now, we won't be doing that in this class.
I'm just saying optimally, if you're doing
this professionally, you don't just say,
let me control the pins.
You go straight into the device and say,
okay I'm gonna set this register value
equal to ten and see what happens, right?
I'm gonna write some data into this
memory location and see what happens.
You would like to be able to do that.
It gives you a much more precise
control over the behavior of the system
because doing through the input
bins can be indirect but
optimally that's what you would like.
So that's controllability.
Controllability allows you to do
testing to test certain circumstances
that you think might be causing a bug or
triggering a bug at any rate.
So addition to controllability
you need observability.
Now observability is the ability to
observe intermediate and final results.
So what do you need to observe?
First thing you need to
observe are the output pins.
The outputs of the whole system, you need
to see what values are on those pins.
Now often you can observe these
directly through the actuators.
So say the output pin
is connected to an LED.
You look at the LED,
you can tell if the pen is high or
low, right, something like that.
You look at the, say it's a wired to an
LCD screen, you look at the LCD screen and
you can tell based on that, you can infer
what type of data is on those pins.
So you wanna be able to observe the pins.
You can also directly observe
the pins If you take a multimeter and
wire it straight to the pins.
Multimeter, basically,
you can read the voltage, and the current,
and the resistance.
So, you could just read the voltage off of
the pins, and see what the voltages are.
So, that's a more direct
way of reading it.
Now, another way to do it, and
we won't be doing this in
the class is using a oscilloscope.
So if a signal, an output ping,
changes slowly over time,
then a multimeter is fine.
Multimeters change slowly,
too so that works.
But if the signal is changing fact
in every millisecond, let's say.
You can't see that on a multimeter.
You would need to use a oscilloscope.
And a oscilloscope basically
shows me the voltage over time.
So you'd wire to the oscilloscope and you
can see you can observe the data that way.
So the outputs are something that
you would want to observe and
we have ways of observing outputs of,
at least if they're slowly changing we can
observe them through whatever
the devices are that.
Maybe multimedia but
also whatever the output devices are,
whatever the actuators are.
Now again,
you would also optimally like to be
able to observe the registry content.
So you'd be able to, like to be able to
look at the registry values at a certain
point in time, see what they are.
Like after a certain instruction,
maybe say,
oh what's in this memory, right,
to see what the intermediate results are.
We won't be doing that in this class but
optimally you would like that.
So you need controllability and
observability somehow in order
to do testing and do debugging.
And we're primarily going to do that
through the input and output pins.
So now okay so we're doing it
And next slide says I/O, input and
output access, is insufficient.
So that's maybe a strong term,
not insufficient.
It is maybe more difficult to
debug through only the inputs and
outputs, but with the level of difficulty
that we're dealing with in this class,
input and output pins
are generally sufficient for that.
But if you're doing this professionally or
making bigger pieces of code, just look at
the input and outputs, will probably
not be sufficient to do debugging.
It'll make debugging much harder.
So, here's a little example, say you've
got some Arduino program running, and
the Arduino you're using pins zero and
one on the left side.
Pins 0 and 1 as the input pins,
and pin two is the output pins,
wired to some actuator or whatever it is.
Now in between, inside the Arduino
we've got some code running.
And those blocks are showing
the code running.
So, you see three blocks main, and fu,
and bar, those are three functions.
There's the main function
which calls a fu function,
which calls a bar function,
three functions inside your code.
Now let's say you run your system and
the output is on Pin 2.
So you look at Pin 2, you look at it's
values, see it's wired to an LED.
And you see that it has the wrong value.
So if it has the wrong value how
do you know where the bug is?
The bug could be in the main function, it
could be in the fu function, it could be
in the bar function, or it could be in
some nasty combination of the three.
But how do you zero in
on where the bug is?
Just knowing that the output is wrong,
that the Pin 2 is wrong,
doesn't give you a lot of information.
It's exactly where in the chain
the problem happened,
what part of your code it happened.
Now if you have a small piece
of code like the blink example.
If you're talking five or six lines
of code or something, so who cares.
But if you have a real piece of code
then you need more direction than just,
the output is wrong, right?
You need to know exactly
where it went wrong.
Maybe which variable had the wrong value
in the variable stored memory somewhere.
So I/O access for big systems is
insufficient for doing debugging, but for
what we're doing, it's what we have,
and it's efficient.
Okay, so
properties of debugging environment.
So what would you like to have in
terms of debugging environment?
And what I'm talking about here
is really optimal, in terms of,
if you're building a bigger system or more
complicated system what you would like.
We don't have this, okay, for the Arduino,
but this is what you would like,
this is what professionals have.
So run control of the target.
Run control of the target is very useful,
and in fact, now we won't have it for
the Arduino, but when you write code,
you gotta have run control.
If you just write C code on your desktop,
laptop, you can get run control.
So by run control I mean you've
gotta be able to stop and
start the program In the middle.
Not just wait till the end,
just wait till it's done.
You wanna be able to stop
the program dead in the middle and
at that point start looking at variables,
let's say.
Looking at register values, look at
memory contents, that type of thing.
So it allows you,
having run control allows you to look
at the intermediate values manually.
So generally this is
done using breakpoints.
We won't be using breakpoints, but
breakpoints are basically you look at your
code, and you see something's gone wrong,
and you have a suspicion.
Oh, I think the problem's
somewhere around line 53.
So you set a breakpoint at line 53, and
you let the code run until line 53.
Then it stops, and at line 53,
you can then type in, or
it depend on your interface of
your debugging environment.
You can look at the values of
the registries, the values of the memory,
the values of the variables,
at when you're at line 53.
And then you can step through the code,
you can say okay, one more line.
Let's look at the values now.
And you can keep looking at
the values until they go wrong.
You can say, oh now value x has the wrong
value, I know it happened on line 54,
something like that.
So that's one control of the target.
We don't have that for the Arduino,
for the Arduino UNO, anyway.
But that's a very useful thing to have.
Real-time monitoring of the target.
So what we mean by this is that,
if you, so
say you use the run control on
the target it alters the timing.
The timing execution of the target.
So what that means is, that say your code,
say you got a piece of code.
And generally that code,
say you got a loop, right?
The loop function.
And it takes one millisecond to
execute the loop function, let's say.
So if you do run control and
you stop, set a break point in the middle
of that, it runs for half a millisecond.
You check things and you run it for
another half a millisecond.
But, the total execution time is now
much longer because you stopped it and
did some debugging and checking, right?
So, you have now completely altered
the timing, the performance of the system.
Now in a system like in IOT devices,
a lot of IOT devices,
the timing is very important to
the correct operation of the system.
If you don't get the timing
right it doesn't work.
So real-time monitoring
is what you would like.
Real time is where you don't stop,
you don't set a break point and
just stop the execution.
You view data about the execution
in real time right.
As it is executing,
you are viewing the data.
So for instance,
say there's a value x of variable x,
you don't have to stop the program and
then say print x.
You can just see x coming out on
some pins while it's executing.
Without slowing down the processor, you
can still see the value of x, let's say.
That's run-time monitoring, very useful.
We don't have that.
But, very useful.
It's not intrusive in
terms of performance.
That's fairly important for
our timing constraint systems.
There are many IOC devices
where timing is important.
Related to that is timing and
functional accuracy.
Again, this is also related to the timing.
What this is referring to is the fact that
sometimes the way people debug is rather
than running the code on a real system,
they simulate the code.
Now, if you simulate the code,
the simulator usually doesn't run at
the same speed as the actual system.
So you're altering the timing performance
just because you're doing simulation.
So you want timing and
functional accuracy.
You want the simulated version to be
exactly the same in terms of timing
as the original and
you want functional accuracy.
So another thing about simulators
is that often simulators,
they model most things but there's certain
things they can't accurately model.
So they can't do certain behaviors.
For instance,
if you're doing a simulation.
Simulating an analog to digital
converter is very hard.
Sometimes simulators won't do that.
So it'll be inaccurate in its results for
the A to D conversion.
You might be doing an analog read.
And then your analog read data
will be incorrect because
the simulator wasn't accurate enough.
So you want accuracy
in terms of timing and
in terms of functionality if
you can get it, thank you.
[MUSIC]